What is a data lake?
A data lake is a centralized repository that allows you to store all your structured and unstructured data at any scale. You can store your data as-is, without having to first structure the data, and run different types of analytics—from dashboards and visualizations to big data processing, real-time analytics, and machine learning to guide better decisions.

Why do you need a data lake?
Organizations that successfully generate business value from their data significantly outperform their peers. A 451 Research survey showed that more than half of surveyed enterprises have a data lake implemented today, with another 22% citing plans for a data lake within 36 months. Companies implementing modern data architectures, including data lakes, have demonstrated measurable advantages in operational efficiency and revenue growth. These leaders use advanced analytics, artificial intelligence, and large language models across diverse data sources, including real-time streams, IoT sensors, social media, and customer interaction data. This comprehensive data strategy enables them to make data-driven decisions faster, personalize customer experiences, optimize operations through predictive maintenance, and identify new revenue opportunities before competitors.

What are the essential elements of a data lake and analytics solution?
As organizations are building data lakes and an analytics platform, they need to consider a number of key capabilities including:

Data movement
Data lakes allow you to import any amount of data that can come in real-time. Data is collected from multiple sources, and moved into the data lake in its original format. This process allows you to scale to data of any size, while saving time of defining data structures, schema, and transformations.

Securely store and catalog data
Data lakes allow you to store relational data like operational databases and data from line of business applications, and non-relational data like mobile apps, IoT devices, and social media. They also give you the ability to understand what data is in the lake through crawling, cataloging, and indexing of data. Finally, data must be secured to ensure your data assets are protected.

Analytics
Data lakes allow various roles in your organization like data scientists, data developers, and business analysts to access data with their choice of analytic tools and frameworks. This includes open source frameworks such as Apache Hadoop, Presto, and Apache Spark, and commercial offerings from data warehouse and business intelligence vendors. Data lakes allow you to run analytics without the need to move your data to a separate analytics system.

Read about Data Analytics »

Machine Learning
Data lakes will allow organizations to generate different types of insights including reporting on historical data, and doing machine learning where models are built to forecast likely outcomes, and suggest a range of prescribed actions to achieve the optimal result.

Read about Machine Learning »

How does a data warehouse compare to a data lake?
Depending on the requirements, a typical organization will require both a data warehouse and a data lake as they serve different needs, and use cases.

A data warehouse is a database optimized to analyze relational data coming from transactional systems and line of business applications. The data structure, and schema are defined in advance to optimize for fast SQL queries, where the results are typically used for operational reporting and analysis. Data is cleaned, enriched, and transformed so it can act as the “single source of truth” that users can trust.

Read about data warehouses »

A data lake is different, because it stores relational data from line of business applications, and non-relational data from mobile apps, IoT devices, and social media. The structure of the data or schema is not defined when data is captured. This means you can store all of your data without careful design or the need to know what questions you might need answers for in the future. Different types of analytics on your data like SQL queries, big data analytics, full text search, real-time analytics, and machine learning can be used to uncover insights.

As organizations with data warehouses see the benefits of data lakes, they are evolving their warehouse to include data lakes, and enable diverse query capabilities, data science use-cases, and advanced capabilities for discovering new information models. Gartner names this evolution the “Data Management Solution for Analytics” or “DMSA.”

For an in-depth comparison between data lakes and data warehouses, visit our dedicated comparison page for data lakes vs data warehouses.

What is the value of data lakes?
The ability to harness more data, from more sources, in less time, and empowering users to collaborate and analyze data in different ways leads to better, faster decision making. Examples where Data lakes have added value include:

Improved customer interactions
A Data lake can combine customer data from a CRM platform with social media analytics, a marketing platform that includes buying history, and incident tickets to empower the business to understand the most profitable customer cohort, the cause of customer churn, and the promotions or rewards that will increase loyalty.

Improve R&D innovation choices
A data lake can help your R&D teams test their hypothesis, refine assumptions, and assess results—such as choosing the right materials in your product design resulting in faster performance, doing genomic research leading to more effective medication, or understanding the willingness of customers to pay for different attributes.

Increase operational efficiencies
The Internet of Things (IoT) introduces more ways to collect data on processes like manufacturing, with real-time data coming from internet connected devices. A data lake makes it easy to store, and run analytics on machine-generated IoT data to discover ways to reduce operational costs, and increase quality.

Read about Internet of Things (IoT) »

What are the challenges of data lakes?
The main challenge with a data lake architecture is that raw data is stored with no oversight of the contents. For a data lake to make data usable, it needs to have defined mechanisms to catalog, and secure data. Without these elements, data cannot be found, or trusted resulting in a “data swamp." Meeting the needs of wider audiences require data lakes to have governance, semantic consistency, and access controls.

How do you deploy data lakes in the cloud?
Data lakes are an ideal workload to be deployed in the cloud, because the cloud provides performance, scalability, reliability, availability, a diverse set of analytic engines, and massive economies of scale. 451 Research found 66% of respondents say public cloud is the object storage environment that is or will be used for their primary data lake environment. The top reasons customers perceived the cloud as an advantage for data lakes are better security, faster time to deployment, better availability, more frequent feature/functionality updates, more elasticity, more geographic coverage, and costs linked to actual utilization.


What's the Difference Between a Data Warehouse, Data Lake, and Data Mart?
Data warehouses, data lakes, and data marts are different cloud storage solutions. A data warehouse stores data in a structured format. It is a central repository of preprocessed data for analytics and business intelligence. A data mart is a data warehouse that serves the needs of a specific business unit, like a company’s finance, marketing, or sales department. On the other hand, a data lake is a central repository for raw data and unstructured data. You can store data first and process it later on.

Similarities between data warehouses, data marts, and data lakes
Organizations today have access to ever-increasing volumes of data. However, they must sort, process, filter, and analyze the raw data to derive practical benefits. At the same time, they also have to follow rigid data protection and security practices for regulatory compliance. For example, here are practices organizations must follow:

Collect data from different sources like applications, vendors, Internet of Things (IoT) sensors, and other third parties.
Process data into a consistent, trustworthy, and useful format. For example, organizations could process data to make sure all dates in the system are in a common format or summarize daily reports.
Prepare the data by formatting XML files for machine learning software or generating reports for humans.
Organizations use various tools and solutions to achieve their data analytics outcomes. Data warehouses, marts, and lakes are all solutions that help with storing data.

Read more about XML »

Benefits of a cloud-based data warehouse, data lake, and data mart
All three storage solutions help you increase your data's availability, reliability, and security. Here are examples of how you can use them:

Store your business data securely for analytics
Store unlimited data volume for as long as you need it
Break down silos with data integration from multiple business processes
Analyze historical data or legacy databases
Undertake real-time and batch data analysis
In addition, all three solutions are cost-efficient—you only pay for the storage space that you use. You can store all your data, analyze it for patterns and trends, and use the information to optimize your business operations.

Key differences: data warehouses vs. data marts
A data warehouse is a relational database that stores data from transactional systems and business function applications. All data in the warehouse is structured or pre-modeled into tables. The data structure and schema are designed to optimize for fast SQL queries. A data mart is a different marketing term for the same technology. It is also a relational database, but practical usage differs greatly from that of a data warehouse. Key points of difference are given below.

Read more about SQL »

Data sources
Data warehouses have multiple sources, both internal and external. You can extract data from anywhere, transform it into a structured format, and load it in your warehouse. Data marts have fewer data sources and tend to be smaller in size.

Focus
Data warehouses typically store data from multiple business units. They centrally integrate data from across the organization for comprehensive analytics. Data marts have a single-subject focus and are more decentralized in nature. They often filter and summarize information from another existing data warehouse.

Utilization
Multiple users and projects require the data stored in data warehouses. Hence, warehouses often have a longer lifespan and are more complex in nature. Data marts, on the other hand, may be project-focused with limited use. Teams prefer creating data marts from the enterprise data warehouse and terminating them once the use case is finished.

Design approach
Data scientists use a top-down approach when designing a data warehouse. They plan the overall architecture first and solve challenges as they arise. However, with a data mart, the data engineer already knows details like values, data types, and external data sources. They can plan the implementation from the start and take a bottom-up approach to data mart design.

 

Characteristics	Data Warehouse	Data Mart
Scope	
Centralized, multiple subject areas integrated together

Decentralized, specific subject area

Users	
Organization-wide

A single community or department

Data source

Many sources

A single or a few sources, or a portion of data already collected in a data warehouse

Size

Large, can be 100's of gigabytes to petabytes

Small, generally up to 10's of gigabytes

Design	
Top-down

Bottom-up

Data detail	
Complete, detailed data

May hold summarized data

 	
Learn more about Data Warehouses

Learn more about Data Marts
Key differences: data warehouses vs. data lakes
A data warehouse and a data lake are two related but fundamentally different technologies. While data warehouses store structured data, a lake is a centralized repository that allows you to store any data at any scale. A data lake offers more storage options, has more complexity, and has different use cases compared to a data warehouse. Key points of difference are given below.

Data sources
Both data lakes and warehouses can have unlimited data sources. However, data warehousing requires you to design your schema before you can save the data. You can only load structured data into the system. Conversely, data lakes have no such requirements. They can store unstructured and semi-structured data, such as web server logs, clickstreams, social media, and sensor data.

Preprocessing
A data warehouse typically requires preprocessing before storage. Extract, Transform, Load (ETL) tools are used to clean, filter, and structure data sets beforehand. In contrast, data lakes hold any data. You have the flexibility to choose if you want to perform preprocessing or not. Organizations typically use Extract, Load, Transform (ELT) tools. They load the data in the lake first and transform it only when required.

Data quality
A data warehouse tends to be more reliable as you can perform processing beforehand. Several functions like de-duplication, sorting, summarizing, and verification can be done in advance to assure data accuracy. Duplicates or erroneous and unverified data may end up in a data lake if no checks are being done ahead of time.

Performance
A data warehouse is designed for the fastest query performance. Business users prefer data warehouses so they can generate reports more efficiently. In contrast, data lake architecture prioritizes storage volume and cost over performance. You get a much higher storage volume at a lower cost, and you can still access data at reasonable speeds.





 

Characteristics	Data Warehouse	Data Lake
Data	
Relational data from transactional systems, operational databases, and line of business applications

All data, including structured, semi-structured, and unstructured

Schema	
Often designed prior to the data warehouse implementation but also can be written at the time of analysis

(schema-on-write or schema-on-read)

Written at the time of analysis (schema-on-read)

Price/Performance

Fastest query results using local storage

Query results getting faster using low-cost storage and decoupling of compute and storage

Data quality

Highly curated data that serves as the central version of the truth

Any data that may or may not be curated (i.e. raw data)

Users	
Business analysts, data scientists, and data developers

Business analysts (using curated data), data scientists, data developers, data engineers, and data architects

Analytics	
Batch reporting, BI, and visualizations

Machine learning, exploratory analytics, data discovery, streaming, operational analytics, big data, and profiling

 	Learn more about Data Warehouses	Learn more about Data Lakes
When to use data lakes vs. data warehouses vs. data marts?
Most large organizations use a combination of data lakes, warehouses, and marts in their storage infrastructure. Typically, all data is ingested into a data lake then loaded into different warehouses and marts for assorted use cases. The technology decision depends on various factors as explained below. 

Flexibility
In general, data lakes offer more flexibility at a lower cost. Different teams can access the same data using their choice of analytic tools and frameworks. You can save time as there is no need to define data structures, schema, and transformations.

Data types
A data warehouse is better if you want to store relational data like customer and business process data. If you have a large volume of relational data, your team may consider creating some data marts for specific business needs. For example, the accounts department may create a data mart to maintain balance sheets and prepare customer account statements, while the marketing department may create another data mart for optimizing advertising campaigns.

Cost and volume
A data warehouse can efficiently handle hundreds of petabytes (PB) of data. Data lakes offer a comparatively lower cost for more volume, especially for large numbers of images and videos. However, not every organization may require that level of scale. 

What is a data mart?
A data mart is a data storage system that contains information specific to an organization's business unit. It contains a small and selected part of the data that the company stores in a larger storage system. Companies use a data mart to analyze department-specific information more efficiently. It provides summarized data that key stakeholders can use to quickly make informed decisions. 

For example, a company might store data from various sources, such as supplier information, orders, sensor data, employee information, and financial records in their data warehouse or data lake. However, the company stores information relevant to, for instance, the marketing department, such as social media reviews and customer records, in a data mart.

How does a data mart compare to other types of data storage systems?
Companies use several different types of data storage systems for data management and analytics. Let’s look at some common types of data storage to understand the context in which companies use data marts.

Database
A database is organized storage that computer systems use to store, search, retrieve, and analyze information. There are various types of databases, such as relational databases. A relational database stores information in tables consisting of rows and columns. Data in different tables is connected by a unique identifier known as a key. Keys are the non-repetitive values in specific columns.

Data mart vs. database
A data mart serves as the front-facing element for a department’s data.  You can use a data mart to retrieve and analyze information. Meanwhile, a database collects, manages, and stores information. You can then use tools to process, format, and transfer the stored information to a data mart. 

Data warehouse  
A data warehouse is an extensive database system that stores information for an entire business. It collects raw information from various sources, such as business software and social media feeds, and processes it into structured data stored in a tabular format. Businesses can connect an enterprise data warehouse to business intelligence tools to make smarter decisions. 

Data mart vs. data warehouse
A data mart shares many of the qualities of a data warehouse. Where they differ is that a data warehouse contains enterprise-wide data about various topics. Meanwhile, a data mart stores information closely related to a specific subject. For example, a data warehouse might store information for the marketing, human resources, procurement, and customer support departments. However, a data mart might store only transactional data relevant to a single department. The appeal of building a data mart is that departments who manage their data marts have complete control over the loading and management of their data. 

Many organizations are using technologies like data sharing to publish their data marts to a central data warehouse.  By doing so they can be more agile by distributing ownership and isolating workloads.  Similarly, data sharing allows departmental data marts to consume data shared from a data warehouse or other data marts.

Data lake 
A data lake is data storage that holds raw and unstructured information. It does not store information in files and folders. Instead, it stores unprocessed information in a flat hierarchy on massive storage. Data lakes store different types of raw information, including text documents, images, videos, and audio. 

Data analysts use data lakes to conduct predictive analysis from unstructured data. For example, a data lake might store texts from social media reviews that businesses can use for sentiment analysis. Data analysts can use sentiment analysis to detect negative opinion trends for a company. 

Data mart vs. data lake
Because data lakes store unprocessed data, some of the information might be duplicates or might not be meaningful to the company. Meanwhile, a data mart stores processed data that meets a specific need. A data lake could be the source of a data mart. Businesses determine data trends by looking at historical data in data marts, but they use data lakes to analyze the stored information deeply. 

OLAP
Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) is a method to represent data in multiple dimensions. For example, data analysts use an OLAP cube to simultaneously show sales revenue based on months, cities, and products. OLAP data structures are wide, with fields classified as either facts or dimensions and result in data duplication.  This contrasts with conventional relational databases, which favor narrow structures and little data duplication.

Data mart vs. OLAP cube
OLAP is a specific information storage strategy which denormalizes data into wide tables. OLAP simplifies complex representations of multidimensional data. Some data marts might use OLAP to structure their information, but others use conventional, normalized structures. Business analysts benefit from OLAP structures to visualize information from a data mart. 

Operational data store
An operational data store (ODS) is information storage that acts as an intermediary between data sources and the data warehouse. Data analysts use the ODS to provide near-real-time reporting about transactional data. The ODS supports simple queries and provides only a limited amount of information. For example, the ODS might store sales records only for the past 12 hours. 

Data mart vs. ODS 
A data mart extracts subject-oriented information from a data warehouse, but an ODS sends information into the data warehouse for processing. Data marts offer historical information that you can analyze, but an ODS provides an updated view of current operations. For example, you can use a data mart to identify sales patterns for the past quarter but receive hourly sales figure updates from the ODS. 

Why is a data mart important?
These are some good reasons that companies might use a data mart. 

Retrieve data more efficiently
By using a data mart, companies can access specific information more efficiently. Compared to a data warehouse, a data mart contains relevant and detailed information that a department accesses frequently. Therefore, business managers don’t need to search the entire data warehouse to generate performance reports or graphics.

Streamline decision-making
Companies can create a subset of data from a data warehouse with a data mart. Employees within the department can then analyze the data and make decisions based on the same set of information. 

Control information more effectively
A data mart gives employees highly granular access privileges. This means the company can authorize a certain person to view or retrieve specific data. It helps companies to improve data governance and enforce information access policies. For example, you can use data marts to provide user access to employees for specific information in a data warehouse.

Manage data flexibly
A data mart is smaller and contains fewer tables than a data warehouse. This means data engineers can manage and change information in a data mart without causing major database changes.

How does a data mart work?
A data mart turns raw information into structured, meaningful content for a specific business department. To do this, data engineers set up a data mart to receive information either from a data warehouse or directly from external data sources. 

When it is connected to a data warehouse, the data mart retrieves a selection of information that is relevant to a business unit. Often, the information contains summarized data and excludes unnecessary or detailed data. 

ETL 
Extract, transform, and load (ETL) is a process for integrating and transferring information from various data sources into a single physical database. Data marts use ETL to retrieve information from external sources when it does not come from a data warehouse. The process involves the following steps.

Extract: collect raw information from various sources
Transform: structure the information into a common format
Load: transfer the processed data to the database
ETL tools copy information from external sources like spreadsheets, apps, and text documents. The data mart then processes, organizes, and stores the information in a structured form. 

Analytics
Business analysts use software tools to retrieve, analyze, and represent data from the data mart. For example, they use the information stored in data marts for business intelligence analytics, reporting dashboards, and cloud applications. 

Each data mart serves a small number of users. For example, the marketing manager and senior marketers have access to a data mart, so it takes less time to generate reports and graphs or to perform predictive analysis.

What are the types of data marts?
These are the different types of data marts. 

Dependent data mart 
A dependent data mart populates its storage with a subset of information from a centralized data warehouse. The data warehouse gathers all the information from data sources. Then, the data mart queries and retrieves subject-specific information from the data warehouse. 

Pros and cons
Most data management and administration works are performed in the data warehouse. This means that business analysts do not need to be highly skilled in database management to use information from the data mart. Although dependent data marts make retrieving information much easier, they present a single point of failure. If the data warehouse fails, all the connected data marts will also fail. 

Independent data mart
An independent data mart does not rely on a central data warehouse or any other data mart. Each data mart collects information from its sources instead of from a data warehouse. Independent data marts are suitable for smaller companies, but only specific departments need to access and analyze information.

Pros and cons
Companies can set up independent data marts with relative ease. However, managing them might be difficult. This is because business analysts need to perform database administrative work at each data mart. It is straightforward to share data between different data marts using strategies like data sharing; departments can read another department’s data and even augment it with their own data.  However, a strong data cataloging strategy must be put into place to ensure each department knows what they are looking at. 

Hybrid data mart
Hybrid data marts collect information from a data warehouse and from external sources. This allows companies the flexibility to test independent data sources before they direct the data to the data warehouse. 

For example, suppose you launch a new product and want to analyze its initial sales data. The data mart uses sales information that comes directly from the e-commerce software and retrieves sales records for other products from the data mart. After the product becomes a permanent fixture in your store, you channel the transaction details to the data warehouse.

What are the structures of a data mart?
Data marts use these structures to store and represent information. 

Star
The star structure has a fact table at its center and branches to several dimension tables. This results in a star-shaped connection. The fact table is a data table that contains summarized data that you can use for analytical purposes. Meanwhile, dimension tables hold descriptive information in a fact table. Each dimension table links to the fact table with a foreign key. A foreign key is a unique identifier, such as a product ID or supplier ID. 

For example, a fact table for sales transactions has the following columns:

Sales ID
Product ID
Supplier ID
Sales amount
A dimension table for products stores the following information:

Product ID
Product name
Product cost
The supplier dimension table has the following columns:

Supplier ID
Supplier name
City
Benefits
In a star structure, the dimension table is denormalized to not extend into additional tables. This means that the dimension table might contain redundant data but improves search and retrieval speed. It also takes less space to store dimension tables.

Business analysts can use a star-structured data mart to make complex queries straightforward. When they search for a specific sales record, the data management system searches through the fact table. When the data mart system finds the correct record, it uses the product ID and supplier ID to query data from the respective dimension tables. 

Denormalized
A denormalized structure stores all the related data in a single table. It does not have complex joints between fact tables and dimension tables. Data analysts use a denormalized data mart because it improves query speed. For example, a search for a sales record takes place in a single denormalized table as follows:

Sales ID
Product 
Product name
Product cost
Model name
Weight 
Size
Supplier 
Supplier name
City
Sales amount
A denormalized data mart is suitable for real-time reporting because of its single-table approach. However, denormalizing the data mart leads to data redundancy. For example, the same product name might appear in multiple records. This leads to additional storage space and expensive implementation costs.

What are the steps in implementing a data mart?
Cloud data engineers set up a data mart by doing the following:

Launch their cloud-native data platform.
Populate the data mart with business data. They ensure that the data has the correct format and is relevant to the business users.
Set up the data mart so that multiple users can access data from it. For example, they install a reporting dashboard in the data mart. 
Continue to monitor, optimize, and resolve issues when the data mart runs.