Grid Computing for Financial Services
Overview
Today, Financial Services companies of all sizes are driving the next evolution of grid computing by working with AWS to expand their on-premise capabilities to the cloud. These organizations require increased computing power to address ever-changing industry conditions: stringent capital obligations, more rigorous and frequent stress testing requirements, market fluctuations, accelerated product development lifecycles, and greater regulatory oversight of financial products.

By building grids with AWS, Financial Services organizations are able to navigate through these conditions and take advantage of cloud-enabled benefits, such as elastic capabilities to scale to peak processing demands at a moment’s notice, automation features to minimize manual processes, and lower costs with a pay-as-you-go consumption model, among others.


AWS is how leading energy and utility organizations are powering innovation at scale
The energy and utility industry is facing unprecedented challenges with surging demand and the pressure to transition to cleaner energy sources. With Amazon’s deep industry expertise and experience managing our extensive energy infrastructure, AWS is helping the industry scale the innovation needed to address today’s challenges. As the most secure cloud provider with the most extensive set of cloud services, AWS is collaborating with leading energy and utility customers, partners and startups to enhance exploration and production, accelerate renewable energy interconnection, increase power grid flexibility, reduce emissions, and maximize safety.

Benefits
Deep industry expertise
Leverage AWS's extensive experience with global utilities and energy leaders, and our expertise managing Amazon’s energy infrastructure, to solve your most complex operational challenges, from grid modernization to renewable integration.

Transform energy operations
Modernize your infrastructure with the broadest set of capabilities tailored to industry needs such as optimizing asset performance, reducing emissions, and adapting to evolving energy demands.

Scale clean energy innovation
Accelerate clean energy innovation by accessing the same highly scalable cloud infrastructure powering breakthrough solutions in renewable energy, smart grids, and carbon reduction.

Choice & flexibility
With the most extensive partner network, including specialized industry specific Energy & Utility Competency partners, customers can find precisely the right solutions for their specific challenges—whether its modernizing grid operations, optimizing field services, or advancing clean energy initiatives.

Security & resilience
Protect critical energy systems with the most secure and resilient cloud infrastructure, designed to meet the most stringent energy and utility industry regulations and cybersecurity standards.


CFD is the mainstay for engineers to improve product designs and rapidly develop viable prototypes
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) on AWS allows you to run your simulations faster and run more of them simultaneously with no queues. Customers such as Formula 1, INEOS, Dallara, Joby Aviation and many more use AWS to accelerate their product design and innovate faster. It’s easy to get started, just follow our workshop for a step by step guide to launch an HPC cluster and start running popular codes like Siemens Simcenter STAR-CCM+, Ansys Fluent, and OpenFOAM.

CFD is the mainstay for engineers to improve product designs and rapidly develop viable prototypes
Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) on AWS allows you to run your simulations faster and run more of them simultaneously with no queues. Customers such as Formula 1, INEOS, Dallara, Joby Aviation and many more use AWS to accelerate their product design and innovate faster. It’s easy to get started, just follow our workshop for a step by step guide to launch an HPC cluster and start running popular codes like Siemens Simcenter STAR-CCM+, Ansys Fluent, and OpenFOAM.



High Performance Computing for Healthcare & Life Sciences
Accelerate the pace of healthcare and life sciences outcomes

Contact the AWS HPC Team
Better outcomes and faster science on AWS
Accelerate time to insight and go beyond the limitations of on-premises infrastructure with high performance computing (HPC) on AWS. Flexible configuration and virtually unlimited scale means you can tune and scale infrastructure as your workloads dictate, not the other way around. AWS supports a wide range of security standards and compliance certifications, including PCI-DSS, HIPAA/HITECH, FedRAMP, GDPR, FIPS 140-2, and NIST 800-171 to help you satisfy core security and compliance requirements. Fuel innovations in healthcare and life sciences with AWS’ partner network and an extensive portfolio of purpose-built HPC tools and services.

Missing alt text value
Use Cases
Computational chemistry and structure based drug design
AWS HPC brings instant access to virtually unlimited computing resources to accelerate structure-based drug design. Combine the rapid advancement of protein structure solutions and faster algorithms for describing and representing flexible 3D molecular models. AWS infrastructure supports improvements in speed, accuracy and scale in virtual screening, molecular dynamics, quantum mechanics and 3-D structure solution.

Amazon EC2 instances like the C5n or C6gn can optimize compute intensive applications and the G4 can help accelerate GPU-compatible applications. You can use AWS ParallelCluster to setup and configure you applications and use Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA) for applications that require a high bandwidth, low-latency, low-jitter network connection for inter-node communications. Amazon FSx for Lustre delivers the high-performance file system needed for multiple instances to access the same dataset. Learn how you can optimize price performance for molecular dynamics simulations with GROMACS on AWS ParallelCluster or speed-up the drug discovery process with AWS Partner OpenEye Scientific.  

Genomics
On AWS you can build and run data applications that are retrospective, real-time or predictive to accelerate the journey from genomic data to genomic insight. Reduce data processing times from week to hours and obtain early insights into diseases such as cancer, cystic fibrosis, and Alzheimer’s. Learn how AWS customers like AstraZeneca and Fred Hutchinson are lowering time-to-results, and running their genomics workloads at scale on AWS.

Whether you are running compute-intensive, FPGA, or GPU-accelerate based applications, you can find the right compute platform with Amazon EC2. If you are running compute intensive applications, read this blog to learn how you can significantly lower costs with AWS Graviton2. You can also use AWS Batch to orchestrate batch workloads and work with the any workflow language such as Nextflow, DRAGEN, Cromwell, and NVIDIA Clara Parabricks to run your analysis. AWS Open Data Program houses openly available datasets, with 40+ open life sciences and genomics datasets to enable frictionless collaboration, providing research and clinical communities with a single documented source of truth.

Modeling and simulation
Access almost unlimited compute and storage resources for modeling and simulation to inform clinical trial design and predict trial outcomes. With AWS, modeling and simulation workloads such as computational fluid dynamics, pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, (PK, PD), clinical trial, and systems biology simulations can satisfy computational, data standardization, and interoperability requirements. AWS customer, Relay Therapeutics was able to analyze 5 billion molecular compounds in one day vs what would have taken months using their on-premises environment.

Run clinical trial simulations on-demand by deploying Amazon EC2 GPU instances like the G4 and P4d to shorten the time and reduce costs it takes to finish them. With the AWS Deep Learning AMI and Amazon Sagemaker Notebooks you can identify potential drug candidates for new drug development and research faster and more cost effectively.

Imaging
AWS brings the broadest and deepest set of instance types, scalable storage solutions, and advanced machine learning and data integration services to meet imaging workload requirements. On AWS you can elevate image analysis and facilitate long-term data retention. HPC on AWS enables workloads including basic research, data transfer, instrument integration, diagnostic medical imaging, high content screening, digital pathology, MRI, PET, X-Ray, and CT scans. Learn how AMBRA Health expanded its medical imaging platform on AWS, and how UC San Diego leveraged AWS’ HIPAA secure environment to deploy machine learning based algorithms to X-Ray images.

Take advantage of graphics-optimized G4 Amazon EC2 instances, to facilitate medical image rendering in real-time. With AWS DataSync you can quickly transfer data for storage or processing between on-premises or cloud storage solutions or remotely stream from your on-premises workstation using the Amazon DCV remote streaming protocol. You can improve identification and pattern classification in medical images with the machine-learning capabilities of AWS SageMaker.


