Nomura on AWS
Nomura is a global financial services group pursuing a digital transformation strategy across its numerous businesses.

Nomura, a global financial services group
Nomura, a global financial services group headquartered in Japan, is driving digital transformation using Amazon Web Services (AWS). Employees across the group are harnessing generative artificial intelligence (AI) and accessing powerful foundation models like Llama to increase innovation and elevate the customer experience with Amazon Bedrock.

Nomura's AWS Journey
Using Amazon Web Services (AWS) since 2017, the organization’s adoption of serverless and managed services is accelerating innovation and creating efficiencies. Both technical and non-technical staff use AWS DeepRacer to explore artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) technology, mastering reinforcement learning in an exciting environment. Employees also have access to generative AI and foundation models such as Llama through Amazon Bedrock. By digitizing its operations and using AWS, Nomura is shortening development cycles, boosting staff productivity and creativity, and finding new solutions that increase customer satisfaction.


Generative AI and Machine Learning

Developer Efficiency

Business Transformation

Enhanced Compliance

Continuous Innovation
Nomura Uses Llama Models from Meta in Amazon Bedrock to Democratize Generative AI
[2024] Nomura gets access to industry-leading foundation models and puts the power of generative artificial intelligence (AI) into the hands of all its employees using Amazon Bedrock. Aniruddh Singh, executive director and enterprise architect, talks about how security, compliance, and rapid innovation are just some of the reasons Amazon Web Services (AWS) is the company’s primary cloud provider.

 

Watch the video
The Nomura logo displayed next to a person in a suit and pink shirt, with a blurred office background.
About Nomura
Nomura is a global financial services group with an integrated network spanning approximately 30 countries and regions. By connecting markets East & West, Nomura services the needs of individuals, institutions, corporates and governments through its three business divisions: Wealth Management, Investment Management, and Wholesale (Global Markets and Investment Banking). Founded in 1925, the firm is built on a tradition of disciplined entrepreneurship, serving clients with creative solutions and considered thought leadership.