1. Sentence structure
To communicate effectively in the workplace, employees should understand the different elements of a sentence and how to use them in the correct order. They include verbs, adverbs, adjectives, nouns, prepositions, subjects, objects, and clauses.

Employees may need to know how to write simple, compound, complex, or compound-complex sentences, depending on their role. Understanding these foundations helps employees communicate effectively. 

2. Passive vs. active voice
When using the active voice, the sentence's subject performs an action. In comparison, the subject receives the action when using the passive voice. For example, “ABC Company prioritizes customer service and value” uses the active voice, whereas “Customer service and value is prioritized by ABC Company” uses the passive voice. 

Most of the time, you must use the active voice in business writing. It’s more direct and clear, making writing more engaging to the reader.

3. Pronouns
Pronouns are words that can replace proper nouns – for example, “I,” “you,” “he,” “she,” and “they.” 

Using pronouns makes writing more concise and natural-sounding. For example, rather than saying, “Vera is our marketing director. Vera is passionate about communication”, you can say, “Vera is our marketing director. She is passionate about communicating with customers.”

4. Linking verbs
Regular and irregular verbs usually describe an action in the sentence. However, linking verbs describe the state of the subject. 

“Be,” “seem,” and “look” are common linking verbs. Examples include “She is the chief executive officer of the company” and “The market looks like it is moving in an upward direction.”

Grammar rules state that linking verbs cannot be followed by a full clause. Understanding the rules around linking clauses means candidates can produce more complex, descriptive sentences. 

5. Subject-verb agreement
Verbs must agree with the number, person, or gender of the sentence's subject. For example, in English, the verb “be” in the present tense changes depending on the subject – ”I am,” “you are,” or “she is.” 

Employees need to know and apply the correct subject-verb agreement rules for effective and error-free communication. 

6. Homophones
Homophones are words that are pronounced the same but spelled differently. Some common examples when you learn English include:

“Your,” “you’re”

“There,” “they’re,” and “their”

“Loose” and “lose”

“Affect” and “effect”

“Compliment” and “complement”

Using the wrong homophone in written communication can reflect poorly on your business, so you must test candidates’ awareness of them. 

7. Possessive apostrophe
The placement of an apostrophe can change the meaning of a sentence. For example, “all of the candidate’s results were strong” refers to a single candidate, while “all of the candidates’ results were strong” refers to multiple candidates. 

Understanding the correct placement of a possessive apostrophe is important for clarity and avoiding misunderstandings. 