Types	Definition	Adjectives	Examples
Possessive Adjective
Possessive adjectives include any words that express someone's ownership or possession of something.	My, your, his etc	Shivam is my brother
Interrogative   Adjective
An interrogative adjective is a word, such as "whose," "what," or "which," used to modify a noun or pronoun by posing a query.	what, when, where, why, which, how etc.	Which novel did you read recently?
Adjective Demonstrative                          
A demonstrative adjective, as its name suggests, is an adjective that can be used to define someone or something's position directly.	this’, ‘that’, ‘these’  ‘those’ etc. 	The ambience of my office is chilling.
Compound Adjective
When two or more words are combined, the result is a compound adjective that can serve as an adjective in a phrase. A noun, a present participle, or a past participle can be combined with an adjective to create a compound adjective.	four-foot, part-time, all-too-common, green-eyed, cold-blooded, man-eating, well-behaved.	Rohit is a part-time worker.


Adjectives vs. Adverbs
Adjective
Adverbs
A word that modifies a noun or a pronoun is an adjective. Generally, an adjective's function is to further define and quantify a noun or pronoun.	A word that modifies verbs, adjectives, or other adverbs is known as an adverb. It provides extra details about the sentence's verb. Every word starts with at least one syllable. Adverbs can provide more specific information on time, method, frequency, and other topics.
Beautiful, sleeveless, edible, meaningless, beautiful, adorable, gorgeous, breakable, homeless, big, old,  green,  antique, more intelligent, prettiest, worse, aggressive.
agreeable.	Fast, Hard, slowly, bravely, foolishly, wisely, loudly, soundly, badly, carefully, fluently, beautifully, clearly, Today, Tomorrow, yesterday, last night, last day, last week, Here, There, away, down, anywhere, everywhere, above, below, etc.
1. I like that really big, old, green antique bike that is parked here.

2. Ashwani is taller than Barsha.

3. Rohit is a part-time worker.

1. The farmer called again.

2. My daughter was too careless.

3. She therefore left the school.