There are mainly nine types of Adverbs :

Adverb of Manner
Adverb of Place
Adverb of Time
Adverb of Quantity / Range
Adverb of Affirmation or Negation
Adverb of Reason
Interrogative Adverbs
Relative Adverbs


Adverb of Manner
Those adverbs which show the method of "to be an action" are called the Adverbs of Manner.

Adverb of Manner Example: Fast, Hard, slow, bravely, foolishly, wisely, loudly, soundly, badly, carefully, fluently, beautifully, clearly, etc.

Sentence example:

The lion ran fast
She works hard
He fought bravely          
Adverb of Time
Those adverbs which show time are called the Adverb of time.

Adverb of Time Examples:Today, Tomorrow, yesterday, last night, last day, last week, etc.

Sentence example :

They saw me yesterday
Parul arrived late
Radheshyam will arrive soon.
Adverb of Place
Those adverbs that express place are called Adverbs of Place.

Adverb of Place Example: Here, There, away, down, anywhere, everywhere, above, below, etc.

Sentence example : 

She was sitting here.
My Bacharwar lived there.
She looked up.
Adverb of Number
Those adverbs which express the frequency number of "to be an action" are called Adverbs of numbers.

Adverb of Number Example:Once, twice, thrice, again, firstly, secondly, etc.

Sentence example : 

The farmer called again.
She always tries to do her best 
SSC student frequently comes unprepared.
Adverb of Quantity
Those Adverbs express quantity, the extent of the adjective, and an adverb called Adverb of Quantity.

Adverb of Quantity Examples: Too, very, quite, enough, rather, fairly, etc.

Sentence Example : 

My daughter was too careless
She was very tired
The fruits are almost ripe.
Adverb of Reason
Those adverbs which express the sense of reason are called the Adverbs of Reason.

Adverb of Reason Example: Hence, Therefore, Consequently, etc.

Sentence example : 

She, therefore, left the school
He was therefore fined
Adverb of Affirmation or Negation
Those adverbs which express the sense of affirmation or negation are called the Adverbs of Affirmation or Negation.

Adverb of Affirmation or Negation Example: Not, Surely, certainly, indeed, not at all, etc.

Sentence example : 

Our hero is certainly alive
Probably he will win.
Interrogative Adverbs
Those adverbs which are used to ask questions are called Interrogative Adverbs.

Interrogative Adverbs Example : Chhatrapati: When, How, Where, etc.

There are 6 types of Interrogative Adverbs :

Interrogative Adverbs of Time - Example - When will you return?
Interrogative Adverbs of Place - Example - Where do you live?
Interrogative Adverbs of Numbers - Example - How many boys were present there?
Interrogative Adverbs of Manner - Example - How are you today?
Interrogative Adverbs of Quantity - Example - How much did you pay for this iPhone?
Interrogative Adverbs of Reason - Example - Why are you late for this class?
Relative Adverbs
Those Interrogative adverbs which are used to add two sentences are called Relative Adverbs. Relative adverbs express the relation between "obvious" and "non-obvious" Antecedents.

Relative Adverbs Sentence example : 

This is the place where my grandfather lived.
Do you know what is the price of this laptop?
Examples of Adverb
These examples cover a range of adverbs that describe emotions (happily, sadly), frequency (always, never), time (yesterday, today), degree (well, badly), location (here, there, everywhere), and manner (quickly, slowly). Adverbs help provide more details and context to a sentence. It enhances our understanding of the actions that are performed.

Adverb of Manner

Quickly, slowly, carefully, loudly, quietly, easily, hardly.

Adverbs of Place

Here, Everywhere, there

Adverbs of Time

Yesterday, today, now, then, soon, eventually

Adverbs of Quantity/Range

Almost, Entirely

Adverbs of Number and Frequency

Once, Frequently

Adverbs of Affirmation/ Negotiation

Certainly, Never

Adverbs of Reasons

Therefore, Consequently

Interrogative Adverbs	When, Where
Relative adverbs	Where, When