What Is a Verb?
Verbs are words that show action in a sentence. Just like nouns and adjectives, they’re one of the eight parts of speech.

Verbs also show:

the tense (time period) of a sentence
agreement with the subject of a sentence
a noun’s state of being
more information about a noun
A printable chart of the nine types of verbs can help you keep them and their functions straight. 

Categories of Verbs
Use of Verb in Active and Passive Voice
Verb Conjugation in English
I like butterflies. [ 1st person singular number]
They like butterflies. [3rd person plural number]
She likes butterflies. [ 3rd person singular number]
I do. [ Simple present ]
I am doing. [ Present continuous]
I have done. [Present perfect]
I have been doing. [ Present perfect continuous]
I did. [ Simple past]
I was doing. [ Past continuous]
I had done. [ Past perfect]
I had been doing. [ Past perfect continuous]
I will do that. [ Simple future]
I will be doing that. [ Future continuous]
The 9 Types of Verbs
With all the jobs verbs have, it’s not surprising that there is more than one type. In fact, there are nine types of verbs — and understanding them can help you make your writing more interesting.

1. Action Verbs
Action verbs describe actions that someone can do or demonstrate. Most verbs are action verbs. Typically, action verbs follow nouns or pronouns in a sentence.

Examples of action verbs include:

Naomi accepted the job offer.
We baked a carrot cake.
She ironed her dress. 
Mark drinks vanilla lattes.
2. Stative Verbs
Stative verbs describe a position or state of being that you can’t see, but exists anyway. While they don't perform any visible action, notice that they're typically followed by a direct object.

You deserve a prize.
Jane hates humidity.
Henry loves billiards.
I remember you.
Advertisement

3. Regular Verbs
Most verbs are regular verbs — verbs that only add -d or -ed in their past tense form.

We walked to the concert. (walk becomes walked)
Pauly lied to his friends. (lie becomes lied)
The kids performed in the school play. (perform becomes performed)
I smelled smoke in the hallway. (smell becomes smelled)
4. Irregular Verbs
Verbs that change form in the past tense are irregular verbs.

I spoke to my neighbor. (speak becomes spoke)
We saw the new action movie last night. (see becomes saw)
The community felt nervous. (feel becomes felt)
Nora made a beautiful speech at the wedding. (make becomes made)
5. Transitive Verbs
Transitive verbs express an action and are followed by a direct object. They “transfer” their action to another noun (underlined). Many transitive verbs don’t make sense without an object.

Joshua brought the noodles. (Joshua brought doesn’t make sense without noodles)
Sarah organized the kitchen. (Sarah organized doesn’t make sense without the kitchen.)
Can I borrow your car? (Can I borrow doesn’t make sense without your car)
Oliver sends his love. (Oliver sends doesn’t make sense without his love)
Advertisement

6. Intransitive Verbs
Intransitive verbs express an action, but they aren’t followed by an object. However, they can be followed by a phrase.

Teresa smiled at me. (Teresa smiled makes sense on its own)
We sat on the stone wall. (We sat makes sense on its own)
The boat floats in the bathtub. (The boat floats makes sense on its own)
My sister cried all night. (My sister cried makes sense on its own)
Some verbs (such as clean or read) can take transitive or intransitive meanings, depending on the context in the sentence.

7. Linking Verbs
Linking verbs connect the subject to details about the subject. Various forms of the verb to be are linking verbs, including am, is, are, and were. 

Examples of linking verbs include: 

Damien is an expert craftsman.
We became best friends in high school.
You seem kind and thoughtful.
I am taller than my brother.
Advertisement

8. Auxiliary Verbs
Auxiliary verbs, also known as helping verbs, help the main verb of the sentence (known as a participle) by extending its meaning. You’ll see them in verb phrases where one verb doesn’t form a complete thought, or in perfect verb tenses.

I have been there before.
Paul doesn’t know his way home.
He didn’t run for president.
The dogs are playing in the yard.
Modal verbs are auxiliary verbs that show possibility or necessity. They always accompany other action verbs.

We will find the perfect pumpkin.
Tiffany might want another helping of pie.
I must finish this project tonight.
The whole team should be there.
9. Compound Verbs
Just like compound nouns combine two words to create a new noun, compound verbs combine two words to create a new verb. 

Compound verbs can be one or two words long, or they can be hyphenated.

Don’t overstay your welcome.
Can you babysit my kids tonight?
Be sure to waterproof your new shoes.
I color-coded my whole file cabinet.
Phrasal verbs are a type of compound verb that end with a preposition. They’re often difficult to directly translate to different languages because they’re English idioms.

Can you take out the trash?
My girlfriend just broke up with me.
Don’t give up on your dreams.
The kids get along so well.


1. action
2. stative
3. regular
4. irregular
5. transitive
6. intransitive
7. linking
8. auxillary
9. compound


1. action
2. transitive
3. intransitive
4. linking
5. helping
6. modal
7. stative
8. phrasal
9. regular
10. irregular
11. gerunds ands infinitives
12. dynamic
13. reflexive


Verb Forms
There are various forms of verbs depending on the action performed by the subject. Here in this article, we will discuss various verb forms.

There are mainly 6 forms of Verbs -
1. Root Verb or Present Form of Verb
2. Simple Present form of a Verb (First Form)
3. Simple Past form of a Verb (Second Form)
4. Past Participle form of a Verb (Third Form)
5. Present Participle and Gerund form of a Verb
6. Infinitive form of a Verb
Stop 1: The Action Verbs, Types of Verbs that Brings Sense to Life:
The first stop of our journey was quite interesting. It was about Action Verbs that bring sense to life. Action verbs are also called dynamic verbs. These are used to express physical or mental actions. These verbs describe actions done by someone or something.Action verbs are used to  convey a sense of movement, change, or activity. These are the powerhouses of a sentence, used to drive the narrative forward and describe events. They play an important role in making communication engaging and lively. The thing we love about action verbs is that anyone can visualise the actions taking place, with the help of action verbs.

Examples include “write,” “read,” “dance,” and “eat.” 

There are two types of action verbs:
Transitive Verbs
Intransitive Verbs
Transitive Verbs
Transitive verbs require a direct object to give meaning to a sentence. These indicate the subject to which action is being done, transferring the action from subject to object. Subject is performing the action on the object.

For Example 

He read an informative book.
In this sentence, “read” is a transitive verb, and “informative book” is the object on which action is being done.
Intransitive Verbs
Intransitive verbs are a type of action verbs that do not require a direct object. These express actions that do not transfer to object, conveying an idea without additional elements. In the realm of verbs, intransitive verbs are independent. Intransitive verbs express actions without the need of direct object. intransitive  verbs set an example of independence and confidence by shining on its own. It shows that action doesn’t require any subject.

Example

She laughs.
The verb “laughs” is intransitive and self-contained. It doesn’t need an object to give a complete meaning to a sentence.
Dynamic Verbs are also known as action verbs. These describes actions that can be seen, felt and heard.

Stop 2 Linking Verbs, Types of Verbs that forms Linkage Bridges:
Continuing our journey, we came across a bridge, it was a very adventurous bridge of linking verbs.

There, we found the bridge is made up of linking words, providing the pathway by removing physical barriers and obstacles.  Linking verbs connects ideas, ensuring a smooth flow in a sentence. Linking Verbs are defined as words used to connect the subject with a subject complement, that could be an adjective or a noun. They describes relationship between the subject and its other information.

Examples of linking verbs include is, am, are, was, were etc.

Stop 3: The Helping Verbs, Types of Verbs that always Helps:
Unexpectedly, we met a man who was very helpful to all. He was like a gift from God for everyone. He told us that he got his motivation from Helping Verbs.

Helping verbs are also called auxiliary verbs. Helping Verbs assist the main verb in a sentence. They give information about the action that is happening by the main verb. Helping verbs create different aspects, voices, moods, and tenses in sentences.

Examples of helping verbs include Is, must, has, can, are, do, will be, have, had etc.

Stop 4: The Modal Verbs:
Within the fascinating world of verbs, we came across modal verbs. They were magnetic narrators, each with its unique ability and use.

Another term for modal verb is modal auxiliary verbs or modals. They modify the main verb in a sentence. They reflect the speaker’s perspective on the necessity, desirability or likelihood of the action. These verbs introduce a subjective element, to offer insights into intentions, attitude or beliefs, regarding the action being described.

Examples of modal verbs include can, might, may, could, shall, should, will, must, ought to and would. 

Modal verbs play an important role in shaping the intention of a sentence, it allows speakers to express certainty, willingness or obligation.

Stop 5: The Stative Verbs:
Stative verbs are verbs that show a state instead of an action. Unlike action verbs, stative verbs describe a state of being, possession, emotion or a sense. Stative verbs convey emotions, thoughts, or qualities that can’t be measured in terms of intensity. They are constant or static. They reflect a state of existence instead of an action.

For example:

He owns a studio. (owns)
She loves cooking. (loves)
Stop 6: The Phrasal Verbs:
Phrasal verbs are verbs consists of a main verb and one or more particles, which can be adverbs or prepositions, together to form a semantic unit. These are idiomatic expressions, as single words can’t give their meanings. Phrasal verbs are often used in English and are used to convey relationships, actions, or changes in states. 

Examples include break down, Look up and put off etc.

Stop 7: Regular Verbs, Types of Verbs which are Regular:
Regular verbs follow a pattern in past participle and past tense forms.  The base form of the verb. Regular ends with “-ed” while creating past and past participle tense. 

Examples include:

Base Form: walk
Past Tense: walked
Past Participle: walked
Stop 8: The Irregular Verbs, Irregular Types of Verbs
Verbs that do not follow the regular pattern while forming their past tense or past participle are Irregular Verbs and don’t necessarily end with “ed- form”. Irregular verbs  undergo changes to show past actions. 

Examples include:

Base Form: go
Past Tense: went
Past Participle: gone
Stop 9: The Gerunds and Infinitives:
We were wondering about -ing forms and base verb forms and came across Gerunds and Infinitives. A verb form that functions as a noun is called gerund. Addition of “-ing” form as a suffix to the base form of a verb forms gerund. Gerund is very important, it functions as subject, object, or complement. Examples include:

I enjoy writing books. (writing)
She likes cooking. (cooking)
An infinitive the base form of a verb, by adding “to” before a word. Infinitives can function as nouns, or adverbs or adjectives. 

This is the best book to study.
She loves to read.
Stop 10: Reflexive Verbs:
Reflexive verbs are types of Verbs which shows the subject performing the action on itself. They are used as the object of the verb and indicate the action is being done to oneself. Examples are yourself, myself, himself, itself, herself, ourselves, themselves and yourselves.

She cleansed her face before going to bed.
They taught themselves how to play the cricket.
She pride herself on being topper.
They enjoyed themselves at the party last night.