I want to turn my physical books glossary page into something of an online wiki. When I wrote the book I went page by page highlighting words and phrases as thet appeared in the text. This order is the natural introduction of terms and fits the flow of the book from beginner to advanced terms.




Glossary


Variable: Letter used to symbolize unspecified numbers. Used in algebra. If x-1 =7 then x =8. Since x can be anything it varies depending on the numbers around it. It is called variable because it varies, the opposite of constants like 1 or 7 which do not vary, they have constant value.


Algebraic expression:  Using letters as variables in equations. An expression is a sum written without an equation sign. An equation has an equals sign like 2+2 = 4 while an expression is 2+2. If we use algebra then 2x – 1 = 4 simply writing “2x – 1” would be an expression.


Factors: Numbers used to form a product. If 2∙3 =6 then 2 and 3 are factors of 6.


Product: Result of numbers multiplied.


Raised dot: This symbol · used for multiplication. Has seven other names including interpunct. 


Obelus: This symbol ÷ used for division. Also called multiplication sign. We just use forward slash /.


Fraction bar: The line between two numbers to indicate a fractional sum such as this ⅓ . Can also be horizontal but that is mostly used for solving equations as a fill in for an obelus since fractions are the quotient of division. Forward slash can be used in place of a horizontal bar if a computer does not have access to it.   Alt 0188= ¼   alt 0189= ½  alt 0190= ¾. 


Quotient: The resulting number from a division operation. The dividend is operated on by the divisor resulting in a quotient. 100 divided by 4 equals 25. 100 is the dividend, 4 is the divisor, 25 is the quotient.


Ratio: A ratio is sometimes but not always a fraction comparing two amounts. In chemistry and science we call this a solution or a proportion. Ratios tell either the amount of different elements added to each other at what rate or the rate at which something is changing. Ratios are written using a colon as 10:1 properly and spoke,” Ten to one”. This differs from writing them as a fraction since in this case we want to know the two quantities being compared. Using both numbers tells us that one element is 10x greater than the other. A ratio given as a fraction would entice us to simply the fraction or write it as a decimal. The ratio 3:2 becomes 1.5, causing the second element to be lost and only the first one remaining. Context of subject matter determines whether we want to keep information or not however colon formula is often preferential.


Base: The number to be expanded using exponents. 107 has 10 as the base and 7 as the exponent, or power.
Power: Another name for exponent. 22  is “2 squared”, 23 is “2 cubed”, 24  is “2 to the fourth, 2 raised to a power of four, 2 expanded to a power of four”. Raising to a power of 2 is called squaring it, raising to a power of 3 is cubing, raising to 4 and beyond is raising to a power of.

Squared: Any number times itself is said to be squared. 2·2=4 4 is the square of 2.


Cubed: Any number raised to a power of three is cubed. 27 is the cube of 3. A base times itself twice. 33= 27.


Raised to a power of: Taking a base and raising it to a power of 4 or higher. See previous example of “power”.


Gross: 122= 144. This is called a “gross”.


Great gross: 123=1728


Volume: The amount of space inside a three dimensional shape serving as a container for some medium such as air or liquid. Used to measure the size of something using mathematical constants. Formula is lwh= volume when l= length, w= width and h= height. Used in geometry and related fields.


Area: The space occupying a two dimensional plane measured by multiplying length by width. Formula is given as lw= area when l= length and w= width. Used in geometry and related fields.

½ 
Formula for perimeter: The length of the borders of a two dimensional shape or plane. 
			  Formula varies based on the number of sides a two dimensional plane has. 


1. Triangle         = x+y+z. 		Measure all three sides and add.
2. Square            = 4x. 			Measure one side and multiply by 4.
3. Parallelogram = 2(x+y). 		Measure sides then distribute out and add.
4. Trapezoid        = x+2y+z. 		Measure sides then add.

5. Circle= dπ.     				Multiply diameter by π or multiply radius by 2 and them multiply by pi. 						Also called circumference.
6. Oval track= πh+2l. 			Circumference of circle plus perimeter of rectangle.


Example using 60 for height and 120 for length, round to appropriate number of digits:
Perimeter of track:       π·60+2(120) 	→	π60+240 → 	188.49+240	→	 428.496 meters


7. πr2. Measure the widest part of the circle to find the diameter then divide it in half to find the radius. Take the radius and square it then multiply by π.


For entire area of track:      lw+ πr2 	→	60·120+ π302	→	7200+π900	→ ≈ 10,027.43 
You only have to find area of the whole circle not two individual halves, (area of rectangle +area of circle).


Operators/Operations: There are six operators + – ÷ ∙ ^ √ used to perform arithmetic. 


Operators are the symbols used to indicate the operation to be performed. Operations the method of increasing or decreasing a quantity or number. Operation signs are called addition (+), subtraction (-), times or multiply (×  or ·), divide (÷), power (^ or write as exponents using superscripts), and radical (√). 


There are six main operations, each corresponding to it's own unique symbol telling how to proceed with determining a solution to a given problem. More symbols can and do exist for the same operations so there is some redundancy. These other symbols exist as a convenience so that they make reading an equation easier to do. Often the (×) is replaced in algebra with the center dot (·) so that the × sign is not confused with the variable “x”.


Most if not all math symbols (called operator signs or math signs) come from earlier and archaic sources. Many times these symbols have been repurposed for many different uses. They have variant sizing, patterns, and different names. Sometimes there are different names for the different versions. Mostly used for annotating literature these older names and versions are not likely appropriate for math or proofreading anymore. They are obsolete and many people would not understand them or their purpose making them only acceptable for private use and not public consumption. You are not expected to know these or learn them. You are however expected to learn the Greek letters and symbols commonly used in math, physics, and engineering. Using archaic and obsolete symbolism will make notes messier and hard to read so their use is discouraged. In addition to learning math operators and signs it is also useful to learn keyboard shortcuts to put them in computer text software programs. These signs do not appear on modern keyboards so you but to insert them using alt shortcuts. Alt shortcuts only work on keyboards with a 10 key numerical pad so you need to invest in one if you want to be productive. Learning to insert them onto your documents and websites is handy. They can even be used in search bars and comments. To embed them in a webpage you have to use html codes and they are different but same idea as alt shortcuts. Warning: Some courses have different meanings for use!


Statement: A line of text or something said giving some description to the conditions of the facts at hand. We use these facts to form our equations so that we can solve them. Statements are often used in word problems when explaining the equation in written English rather than using algebraic expressions. Note however that algebraic expressions and equations themselves are forms of statements as well. In closing a statement must be true or false but not both.


Open sentences: Mathematical expressions containing variables whether written in script or as an equation that must be solved before you know if the statement it is making is true or false.


Solution: A solution is a number that solves our equation.


Solving the open sentence: When we replace variables with numbers the sentence is said to be solved.




Equation:  Equations are expressions containing an equals sign. If it has an equal sign it is an equation. A set or string of terms with operations that requires working to derive a solution. In Algebra equations are balanced so that two sides, a left and right, or separated by an equation sign (=). To keep the equation true you have to perform equal actions on either side or your equation will become unbalanced and therefore false.


Set:  Sets group numbers or objects together so that they are listed using parentheses to differentiate them from other data. Using parentheses like this is called set notation and is mainly a study of set theory. Set theory uses an elongated version (∈ ) of the Greek letter epsilon (ε) to denote members of a set. Members of a set are also called elements. This is used in computer science for object orientated programming (oop), writing strings, arrays, and other places where programming code deals with nested items. Sets also show up in algebra when dealing with simple linear equations and plotting coordinates on a linear graph. Groups of points, called ordered pairs [(0,1)], can be collected and placed inside set notation to display what valves are relevant or appearing for a given function or chart.


For example if we have the points (0,1), (1,2), (2,3),(…), we would nest them like  {(0,1); (1,2); (2,3);(...)}. The ε means that each pair is a “member” of this set.  

Sets are also used in number theory and many other places in math. In spreadsheets the Greek letter sigma (Σ) is used to add. We call this summation or the summing of values inside the nested parentheticals. For example if we had Σ={1,2,3,} it would read as “the summation of {1,2,3,}” and that means that we add and get “6”.  Whether actually adding or just knowing that the values inside are to be treated as a singular value this is how sigma is used.


Greek letters vary in meaning from branch of one mathematics to another. Uppercase epsilon looks just like the English letter E. To avoid confusion exaggerated versions are used to illustrate the meaning better. This is why ∈  is used instead of E or the regular Greek letters. Uppercase epsilon is usually for elements of a set and lower case epsilon (ε) is for denoting a small quantity. There are many uses for the Greek letters and I have included as many of them and their alt codes that I know but sometimes there will be contradictions in terms so you will have to substitute whatever you can and just improvise. If you are using eccentric notation that a reader is likely to be unfamiliar with make that clear before using ambiguous terms. It really only matters that you and your intended audience can understand what notation you are using not anybody else.


Subset: A set with a set. Infinity (∞) is the set of all numbers. All even numbers are a subset of ∞. All even numbers ending with zero are a subset of that set. All even numbers ending with zero under 100 are a deeper nested subset still. A subset would be a level below a superset. 


For example: ∈ {+∞ (2,4,6...(10,20,30...100,110,120...(10,20...90)))}. 


This shows that within positive infinity (as denoted by the +) a subset exists that contains the set of infinite positive even numbers (as denoted by the ellipsis (…)). Then exists all positive even tens, finally there exists a set of even tens that ends at 90.  


Superset: A set containing subsets. A superset would be a level above a subset. 
Null: Ø. This means that a set contains no numbers. ∈ {Ø} means that there are no numbers in this set, not even zero as a placeholder. Literally {} instead of {0}. If null then does not exist abbreviated as dne. Difference between null and zero is if a function mapped 0,1,2 to elements a,b,c then 0 = a; if f(x) ≠ a, b, or c then f(x) ≠ null. Null is like saying n/a for not applicable meaning you exceeded a domain causing a null status.


If selecting items from menu required ordering #0, #1, or #2 then  Ø set is no selection at all.
A = apple= 0	B = banana = 1     C = cherries = 2
f(0) = apple	f(1) = banana	f(2) = cherries	f() = Ø nothing.


Empty set: A set with no elements is called empty or null.


Replacement set: The solution to an open sentence occurs when all variables have been accounted for using numerals. The replacement set for the variables is the solution to the expression. In factoring polynomials you often use replacement sets to find the factors that make up a trinomial.


Negation: Negation means reversing an operation or taking the opposite of something. Subtraction negates or is the negation of addition. By multiplying by a -1 we can negate terms of equations (indeed the entire equation itself) to be the opposite of sign of what it already is. This is useful simplifying and reducing equations to make them cleaner looking or easier to solve.


Properties: Properties are rules that dictate how order of operations should behave and what is permissible when reordering terms to restructure an equation. Properties show how the numbers behave and interact with each other on a foundational level as opposed to simply solving for an answer. Understanding and having innate sense of properties shows an advanced mastery of mathematics and goes beyond superficial plugging in of values to get a result. You know how the numbers behave conceptually rather then mechanically.


Additive identity property: For any number a,  a+0 = a. This states that 0 does not change the value.


Multiplicative identity property: For any number a, a·1 = 1·a. 


Multiplicative property of zero:  For any number a, a·0 = 0·a. This states that the order of terms is irrelevant and moving them around does not change the answer. [In addition any number times zero is zero. Further diving by zero is undefined. It is undefined since dividing by zero does not give us non zero factor.


Additive inverse: The number of the same numerical value but opposite quality value. Two additive inverses sum to zero.  


Multiplicative inverse: The reciprocal of a number or function. The product of two reciprocals is 1. Ex. ⅕∙5 = 1.


Properties of equality: The following properties are true for any a, b, or c. 


Reflexive:  a = a
Symmetric: if a = b then b = a. This just restates commutation law or uses double substitution.
Transitive: if a = b and b = c then a = c.
Substitutive: if a = b then a may be replaced by b. 


Distributive property: For any numbers a, b, c:


a (b + c) = ab + ac   and    (b + c) a = ba + ca 
a (b – c) = ab –  bc   and    (b – c) a = ba – ca     

To remove parenthetical terms you must use multiplication by the factor outside the parentheses, in this case “a”. If there is no factor then multiply by “1” to cancel the parentheses. If there is a minus sign infront of the parenthetical then you must multiply every term inside by –1. This inverts all signs of the terms (sign flipping) changing them to there additive inverses: 5(x+2) = 5x+10 	–5(x+2) = –5x – 2     –(5x+3x–4) becomes –5x–3x+4.

Commutative property:  This states that the order of terms is irrelevant and moving them around does not change the answer for addition and multiplication. 2∙3÷4 is same as 3∙2÷4 , 2∙¾ , 3∙ 2/4.   


Associative property: For any numbers a, b, c (a + b) + c = a + (b + c) and (ab) c = a (bc). It says that if you change the grouping for + or ÷ the result is the same.


Term: Is a number, variable, product, quotient, or mixed number. Terms are the groups of numbers separated by operands. Each term may be composed of multiple parts but is considered a single value. A trinomial has three terms each separated by a plus or minus sign.


Simplest form: An expression without like terms or parentheses. The final answer when solving equations.


Like terms: Terms that contain the same variables raised to the same power. 5x2 and 4x2  are like terms but 2x3 and 5x are not. 5xy5z and y5xz are like but 5x5yz and 5xy5z2  are not. 


Coefficient: The numeral factor in a mixed number. In 5x the coefficient is 5 because it is a constant number.    


Constant:  A number that is not a variable. Numbers 0-9 are constants because they are not alphabetic. In 5x the coefficient 5 is the constant and x is the variable. All variables have letters to denote their changing values. All constants except transcendentals have numerals  to denote their value is always the same. Some constants like Euler's number “ e ”, the imaginary number “ i ”, and π use letters to represent their value but this is because they are very long and only used as a convenience. They are considered constants because their value is known and it does not change. The difference between a variable and a constant is 5 is constantly 5 while x varies.

Pi: The mathematical constant approximated by 3.141592 or 22/7 or 355/113 to denote the symbol π.  Pi is used to calculate circumference and area of circles using the formulas dπ for circumference and πr2  for area. There are different approximations for pi but the symbol always remains the same.  


Domain: The set containing x values of a graph. What choices exist for x as an input for a function.


Range: The set containing x values of a graph. What choices exist for x as an output for a function.


Graph: The line or curve of a set of plotted points on a piece of graph paper. Literally the image itself.


Function: A ratio of x:y used to write equations in graph form. Written as f(x) = equation.


Inverse function: The graph of a function that has inverted (swapped) x and y values. Written as f-1(x) = equation.


Slope: The tangent ratio of a line given by the formula M= y2 – y1/x2 – x1. Slope is how angled a line is to the x-axis. The formula simplifies to M = y/x. The M is chosen because it looks like a mountain slope making it easier to recognize. Tangent is a trig function that is the height of a triangle divided by it's base. Tangent =M =sine/cosine.

Linear Equation: A line graph given by the formula y = Mx+b. This is heavily used in algebra and beyond.


Quadratic Equation: A parabola graph. Quadratics are second degree polynomials while lines are 1 degree.


Cubic Equation: A graph having 3 degrees. Think of phase “giving someone the third degree”. 


Cartesian grid: A sheet of graph paper with numbered lines called axes for plotting points. Any rectangular grid for graphing.

x-axis: The horizontal number line in a rectangular coordinate system.


y-axis: The vertical number line in a rectangular coordinate system.


x-value: The horizontal distance from the y-axis. This is the x in an ordered pair (x,y).


y-value: The vertical distance from the x-axis. This is the y in an ordered pair (x,y).

Coordinate: The location of a point given by distance from the origin of two axes. Pronounced “ax ease”Axes is plural of axis. Also called “ordered pairs”.

Point: In geometry a location having zero area. A point is given by an ordered pair (x,y) using x and y values or (x,y,z) using x,y, and z values.


In arguments a point is a logical conclusion. Two or more points that co-linear creates a “line of thought”. 
If points are not colinear then the person is “going off on a tangent”. A tangent line touches another line forming a 90° vertex so that a tangent is going off track from the original direction at the fastest rate possible (∞). If two lines of thought intersect at a vertex that point called the “solution” to a “system of equations”. In conflict two opposing lines of thought that intersect have a solution that represents compromise both parties can and will agree to. A parabola is a curved line forming an elliptical vertex given x2. There are different symbolic interpretations but either building a base for your case using x2 to represent area in 2 dimensions or approaching a problem from two different angles which share symmetry and meet at the vertex as a conclusion. The former is easy to apply the latter represents teamwork or independently coming to the same conclusion from different points or using proof to confirm a suspected idea. A cubic is 3d so is a solid block of evidence. Giving someone the third degree involves invasive questioning to gather as much evidence as possible. Depending on the quantity and quality of the evidence a verdict is reached. Side note a vertex represents a corner of 90° – θ where theta can be 0°<θ<90°. 


Verdict and vertex share Latin roots. Ver-dict is “90° diction” of a decision meaning two points of view of complete opposite rotation meet at a single conclusion: yes or no, guilty or innocent. Start at the meeting point and work backwards. You have two rays forming a 90° angle and extend to – ∞ for x and ∞ for y. These are complete opposite axes at there furthest points, one a positive and the other a negative corresponding to yes~innocent or no~guilty. Ver-tex is lesser important but refers to the crossing of lines to make letters of the alphabet stemming from Phoenician cuneiform the precursor to Latin. Versed is 90° and tex is text meaning writing as in context which means “with text” or the other writing that goes with previous writing to explain it. Context is always the definition as it defines or illustrates the picture,  which is a graph made from points. On a different note a song has “verses” which is “rounds” of singing representing a rotation in degrees from end of line to end of line making an arc angle till angles added to 360°, the Greeks represented music mathematically in their cults, too much to surmise here. Note here is a double ontaundre (french for tangent because I am going off on a tangent completely changing points) because note can refer to music or prose) Compare verses with the homophone versus. Verses means lyrics referring to bullion writing which turns and twists down the page and versus is two competing objects, in math versus is the battle between the ratio x:y of a function. Ratios rotate like gear ratios or credit/debit ratios i.e. revolving credit and capitalizing versus expensing.)     Explore more subjects like foreign language, engineering, music theory, and finance.

You have a “overturned verdict” which is a complex rotation of degree 4 meaning an inverse function where x and y are swapped making no~guilty becomes yes~innocent and vise versa. A “snap verdict” where a line of thought P1→P2→P4 = A→B→D where you have a hole in your argument at point C. Holes in your argument (also called logic) are gaps or leaps of faith that lead to illogical rational and bad policy. Of course a hole in a function is given by dividing by 0 creating a domain error at that point. There are many other figures of speech using verdict that are logical in directly mathematical way because that is how legal terminology
originated.     


Compare with “sur” which means to cover as in a surjective function (many-to-one). Verse is to turn sur is to cover, as in surreptitiously (cover a topic exhaustively).
