What is iPaaS?
Integration platform as a service (iPaaS) is a cloud-based software model for integrating data from multiple applications into a single solution. Most organizations today have multiple applications that handle various aspects of their business processes and IT operations. They must integrate data from all their applications for analytics and deeper business intelligence. With iPaaS, nontechnical users can easily integrate data from third-party software as a service (SaaS) applications and on-premises data centers into a centralized cloud-based service. The iPaaS solution abstracts underlying data integration complexities. This means nontechnical users meet integration needs without requiring complex software development or additional middleware technologies.

While the industry has traditionally used terms like Infrastructure as a Service, Platform as a Service and Software as a Service to group cloud services, at AWS, we focus on solutions to your needs, which can span many service types. This page uses the traditional service grouping of IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS to help you decide which set is right for your needs and the deployment strategy that works best for you.

What are the benefits of integration platform as a service?
Integration platform as a service (iPaaS) has become a crucial solution for businesses that rely on multiple tools and systems and also require seamless data integration. We give several benefits next.

Automated workflows
iPaaS helps you automate workflows between systems, which streamlines operations and reduces manual processes. You get real-time data synchronization between connected systems, which helps ensure that analytics always has up-to-date information. Integrating different systems eliminates data silos and promotes a comprehensive view of business data for improved decision-making.

Speed at scale
Traditional integration is time-consuming. iPaaS platforms come with prebuilt connectors and templates that support faster deployment of complex integrations at scale. You can accommodate growing data volumes or more integrations without significant infrastructural adjustments. Companies can also integrate various systems regardless of where they are hosted—on premises, in a private cloud, or with different cloud providers.

Secure and simplified integration
iPaaS reduces the complexity traditionally associated with integration tasks. It reduces the need for in-house integration specialists or bespoke solutions.

At the same time, there is no compromise around security and quality. iPaaS vendors prioritize security and offer features like data governance, encryption, multi-factor authentication (MFA), and adherence to regulatory standards. Organizations can also manage and monitor all integrations from a centralized dashboard, which streamlines error detection and incident management.

What are the use cases for integration platform as a service?
With integration platform as a service (iPaaS), SaaS application administrators and business analysts can implement most of the integration workflows they need. And they don’t have to months for IT to finish integration projects. We give some example use cases next.

Data synchronization across applications
iPaaS helps ensure the consistency of data across different data sources and applications, so you can perform real-time operations.

For instance, with iPaaS, you could sync data from your marketing automation platform with your customer relationship management (CRM) and enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems. Sales, marketing, product, and fulfillment teams could then access up-to-date customer activities instantly.

Application integration
iPaaS plays a pivotal role in merging the business logic of multiple applications. This integration forms broader, more beneficial workflows and procedures, which enhances the efficiency of business operations.

For example, you can create records in Salesforce from new Marketo leads. It’s useful for applications in scenarios like case management, insurance underwriting, order processing, and logistics.

Data migration
iPaaS helps you transfer data from multiple sources to a new destination. There are various reasons for a business to move data. For example, you might want to transition from on-premises hosting to cloud storage, upgrade legacy systems to cloud-based systems like an ERP, or integrate data sources for cost benefits.

Automation
Process automation makes your business operations more efficient. iPaaS interconnects data and applications. And it establishes integration flows that automate specific business processes for efficiency. For example, you can use integration flows to onboard employees, sanction credit applications, or streamline order processing.

How does integration platform as a service work?
The integration platform as a service (iPaaS) vendor provisions integration tooling and infrastructure, so you can share data across third-party SaaS applications. iPaaS platforms typically provide you with a centralized dashboard or user-friendly interface. You can design, orchestrate, deploy, and manage integrations between systems from this interface.

You can also configure and choose both your data sources (like various business applications) and destination targets (like data lakes or warehouses). Many iPaaS solutions have prebuilt connectors for popular applications and databases. You can select and configure the appropriate connector for your needs rather than build integration solutions from scratch. You have to contact the iPaaS vendor if specific business applications are not supported.

We discuss other iPaaS software capabilities next.

Custom integrations
Many iPaaS vendors offer flexible solutions so users can build custom integrations at speed and scale—on a schedule, in response to a business event, or on demand. You can configure data transformation capabilities as part of your integration flows to generate ready-to-use data. For instance, data structures often vary between systems. iPaaS tools allow users to map data fields between systems and transform data into the appropriate format or structure needed for the target system.

You can also develop integration flows that are triggered by specific events. For example, a new record in an application triggers a specific integration action—such as creating a new record in another application. This way, users can define and create workflows between systems. These include specifying which data gets transferred, the frequency of transfer, and any conditions or filters that should be applied.

What is the difference between integration platform as a service and other integration mechanisms?
The integration platform as a service (iPaaS) vendor provisions integration tooling and infrastructure, so you can share data across third-party SaaS applications. iPaaS platforms typically provide you with a centralized dashboard or user-friendly interface. You can design, orchestrate, deploy, and manage integrations between systems from this interface.

You can also configure and choose both your data sources (like various business applications) and destination targets (like data lakes or warehouses). Many iPaaS solutions have prebuilt connectors for popular applications and databases. You can select and configure the appropriate connector for your needs rather than build integration solutions from scratch. You have to contact the iPaaS vendor if specific business applications are not supported.

We discuss other iPaaS software capabilities next.

Custom integrations
Many iPaaS vendors offer flexible solutions so users can build custom integrations at speed and scale—on a schedule, in response to a business event, or on demand. You can configure data transformation capabilities as part of your integration flows to generate ready-to-use data. For instance, data structures often vary between systems. iPaaS tools allow users to map data fields between systems and transform data into the appropriate format or structure needed for the target system.

You can also develop integration flows that are triggered by specific events. For example, a new record in an application triggers a specific integration action—such as creating a new record in another application. This way, users can define and create workflows between systems. These include specifying which data gets transferred, the frequency of transfer, and any conditions or filters that should be applied.