
The boat was rocked due to frustration at systemic racism. The house gays at the top 1% shucked and jived making "positive and nice" music, while  the field straights carried the movement. Images of "happy dancing blacks" contrasts sharply with political activists who were demanding social reform.   The 1970's is characterized by a period of when "good music" was made by the "sexually confused". 

After the killing of the Panthers by white government, confusion sharply decreased sexually, and increased politically. Potential Panthers became drug warriors and narcotic militants losing their spiritual path and serving as puppets for the white drug dealers and governmental agents who set up the drug cartels and subsequently street gangs.  Instead of protesting police they lost all political authority and started selling drugs for them.

Until the African American street gangs blacks had employed non-violent or political themed policies aimed at social progress. From the 1980's forward the change became more rooted in economic and militant dominance. They were no longer easy to subjugate and reversed centuries long trends of being without physical empowerment and social equality. 

As violence increased in the black community it spread to other communities. Funded by drug money these new blacks could terrorize entire communities. Whites feeling their power slip had limited recourse as they were split between white separatism and  indulging in drug use themselves. Out of desperation propaganda was aimed not at securing social equality for the African American race but rather shaming them into compliance through divide and conquer.

Songs like this highlight the middle class blacks that were able to profit by surrendering autonomy to whites, while serving as agents for the white oppressor. If you had money you were modern house negroes and argued to not disrupt the status quo. If you were poor AND verbally, legally, and socially abused, then disrupting the social order was the only hope for survival. Blacks with money were unwilling to get up or even risk loss of pay, blacks without money fought the good fight uncompromised by dirty money.